.. .
   ////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
   //           _ ___               _					 //
   //          (_)__ \             | |					 //
   //  ___  ___ _   ) |_      _____| |					 //
   // / __|/ __| | / /\ \ /\ / / _ \ '_ \				 //
   // \__ \ (__| |/ /_ \ V  V /  __/ |_) |				 //
   // |___/\___|_|____| \_/\_/ \___|_.__/				 //
   // 		     	    						 //
   // Bringing naturally developed scientific applications to the web	 //
   // Jorge Zuluaga (2011)	   	      		      	  	 //
   ////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
   .
.. include:: util.ixt

.. image:: ../images/sci2web-mainlogo.jpg 
   :height: 100px

User Guide
**********

:Author: Jorge Zuluaga
:Version: Revision 1, Wed Nov 30 06:29:15 COT 2011
:Copyright: This document has been placed in the public domain.

.. contents:: Table of Contents
   :backlinks: entry

Abstract
~~~~~~~~

This document presents a complete guide to use Sci2Web_.  You will
learn here how to run Scientific Applications ported to Sci2Web_
server sites and how to get previously computed results obtained by
you or any other users using the same applications.  To start using
Sci2Web_ in a given server site you have to signup for an account.
Sci2Web_ have a rather simple interface for creation and management of
user accounts albeit ensuring the security and privacy of the user
data.  Once you have created your account you will be able to select
any available versions of the Scientific Applications ported to the
Sci2Web_ server site.  In the application page you will be able to
create, run and control instances of the selected application.
Results from already finished instances of the application ran by you
or any other user could be retrieved and download from the application
page, giving Sci2Web_ the additional power of a dynamic scientific
database.  Since many scientific applications are sources of tabular
data, Sci2Web_ includes a simple albeit powerful *web plotting tool*
able to produce high quality scientific plots.  These and other user
operations will be explained in detail in the following sections.

Presenting Sci2Web_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. include:: presentation.ixt

Creating and managing an account
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Creating an account in a Sci2Web_ server site is a simple process: you
just have to Press the Sign Up link at the top right of the page and
fill the sign up form.

Once the form is submitted a notification message is sent to your
e-mail.  You have to use the activation link sent in the notification
message to activate your new account.

.. Important:: If the server site does not support e-mail
   notifications you have to contact the web master to activate your
   new account. The e-mail of the web master is found in the footer
   area.

Once the account is activated you can login and start to enjoy the
applications served in the Sci2Web_ site.

Recovering the user password
============================

If you forget your password you can retrieve it using the login form.
A new password will be sent you by e-mail.  No re activation of the
account is required. 

Changing the user password
==========================

You can change your old password using the link *Your account*.  When
you retrieve a change of password the system will logout you
automatically and you will need to reactivate your account using the
same activation link send it when the account was first created.  

.. Important:: Sci2Web_ uses a simple albeit secure method to
   manipulate the user information.  The password is never known by
   the web master and is stored encrypted in the site database.  The
   user e-mail account is the only way an user could perform
   operations on its account.

Selecting the application
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the main page of a Sci2Web_ server site you will find a list of the
served applications (generally under the tab *Served Applications*).
For each application you will find a box containing basic information:
the application icon (that is also a button to open the application),
the short and complete name of the application (including a link to
the complete description of the application), author, date of creation
and brief description.

.. image:: images/application-brief.jpg

Using the deployable list you can select the version of the
application you want to explore.  Versions having the prefix ``dev``
are reserved for development purposes and altough they can be browsed
you will not be able to create new runs.  Only the application author
and their contributors have permissions to create and run new
instances of this versions.

Once you have selected a version you can click the *Changes log* link
and read a brief description of what makes this version different from
the others.  Clicking on the icon will open a new window with the
application site configured for the particular version you have
selected.  In the header region of the application page you will find
the application logo, the name of the version you have selected and a
link to the license of this particular version.

.. image:: images/application-logo-information.jpg

The application page is divided in a set of tabs configurable by the
application authors and version contributors.  By default the
application page tabs are:

- *Description*: complete description of the application.

- *Downloads*: If the application has been released by authors or
  contributors you will find here the links to download the release
  version of the application.

- *Runs*: This is the most important tab for the purposes of Sci2Web_.
  There you will be able to create new instances of the application,
  run and control them.  You will be able also to access there the
  history of the runs created by you of this particular version of the
  application.

- *Database*: In this section you will be able to search into the
  database of results of this version of the application.  Each time a
  user runs an instance of the application and the run is successful
  its results will be stored in a huge database.  You can retrieve
  those results using the form provided in this section using
  different searching criteria.

.. Important:: It is important to say that not all the applications
   ported to a Sci2Web_ server site should have public rights to
   download, run or search in their database of results.  Authors and
   contributors could limit by different reasons the acces that any
   user has to the application.  For example an application could be
   downloaded but the users could not create new runs or search into
   the database.  In this case the application page becomes simply a
   public information and downloading site for the application
   (lossing most of the potential of Sci2Web).  In other case the
   authors could allow to create runs but does not allow to download
   the application.  The Sci2Web_ application web page becomes in this
   case a *testing platform* without the option to get a copy of the
   application.  Finally authors or contributors could use Sci2Web_
   application page just to give access to the database of results
   that have been computed only by authorized users.  In this case the
   users could not download a copy of the application or create new
   runs but they have access to a valuable database of results
   obtained with the application.

Creating a run
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To create a run you must first log in into the Sci2Web_ server.

The most simple way to create a new run of a served application is go
to the run tab and press the big Run button.  

This action will trigger the openning of a control window for the run
(see figure below)

.. image:: images/run-control-window.jpg
   :width: 90%

The control window is the web interface of the served application.
Here you will be able to configure your run, submit it and see the
results, among other important actions to control the application.

The control window is actually a bundle of two single components: the
configuration (left frame) and the results window (right frame).  The
configuration window has a series of tabs where different types of
input parameters for the application can be set it up.  Values by
default are loaded in the forms when a new run is created.  To get
information about each parameter you just have to focus into the
respective input element (i.e. place the cursor inside the input box
as if you want to modify it).

In the lowest part of the configuration frame you will find a control
box suited with different buttons able to trigger different actions on
the run.  Place the mouse over any of these buttons to check which
action it will trigger.  In the control box you will also found a big
rounded inner box with the status of the run.  When a new run is
created the default status will be *Configured* meaning that the run
has been properly configured and ready to be *Compiled* or *Submitted*.

The action buttons will be activated or deactivated according to the
status of the Run.  For example if the run has not been compiled yet
you will not be able to submit it (*play* button |RunButton|).  The
number and type of control buttons you will find in the control box
will depend on the type of control actions that the
authors/contributors has set up for the application.

In the example run shown in the previous figure you have to press the
compile button |CompileButton| to get your run compiled and ready to
be submitted.

Each time you perform a control action on your run the status will
change.  There is a fixed set of run status: Configured, Ready,
Submitted, Running, Paused, Stopped, Killed, Finishing, Finished and
Error.  They are self explanatory.  When your run is at the Submitted,
Running, Paused or Finishing status the configuration frame will be
blocked out to avoid the reconfiguration of a run that is in the
middle of a computation.  In these cases however you will be able to
perform special actions (Stop |StopButton|, Kill |KillButton| or
Resume |ResumeButton|) to change the status of your run.

Once your run is finished the results frame is reloaded showing the
last status of your results.  You can use the reload buttons
|UpdateButton| placed at the upper-right corner of the results
elements to update their content at any time during the execution of
your run.

A special action, the Post Action |PostButton|, could be used to
perform post-execution actions on the results of your run without to
submit it again.  This is a very useful feature when you want for
example to regenerate the plots for a given result without recomputing
again the data.

.. Important:: Not all the applications have the same set of action
   buttons.  Authors/Contributors could limit the number and type of
   control actions you can perform on your runs.

The second way to create and control new runs is using the control
panel provided with most of the application in the runs history
section of the *Run Tab*.  This is an advanced way of creating and
controling your runs and we will explain it in detail in the next
section.

Controlling your runs
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In the Run tab of the application page, just below the big Run button,
you will find the history of the runs prepared and sumitted by you.

.. image:: images/application-run-history.jpg

In general the history maintains a record of what runs you have
prepared and submitted of a given application.  It allows you
additionally to search, configure, download, resubmmit and remove old
runs.

In most of the applications, however, the history section could be
also used to create, control and follow the status of bunches of runs.
These additional capabilities are included in a tool called the
*Control Panel*.  Pressing the Control Panel link located at the
header of the History table you can toggle the control panel box.

.. image:: images/control-panel-box.jpg

Using this panel you will be able to:

* Create at once one or multiple runs from a given configuration
  template (*New from template* |AddButton|).

* Remove an existing configuration template (remove button
  |RemoveButton| at the New from template section)

* Perform a given action to one or multiple runs (*Valid actions*
  section).

The latter feature is particularly interesting since with a single
click allows you to perform complex actions over multiple runs.  For
example you can submit a lot of pre configured runs.  This is a very
useful feature when working with parametric type of runs.

Each run in your history has a contextual menu with a complete set of
additional actions.  To deploy this menu you just have to mouse over
the table box with the run name and press the down button
|DownButton|:

.. image:: images/run-contextual-menu.jpg

Not all the actions shown in the previous figures will be available
for runs of any application.  For example the Download Sources action
|CompileButton| could be restricted by the authors/contributors of the
application.  The same applies for the Browse action |SourcesButton|.

The actions available in the contextual menu are:

- *Configure*: Open the configuration window.

- *Results*: Open the results window.

- *Control Panel*: Open the control window (configuration and results
   in a single window).

- *Run status*: See the status of a submitted run.

- *Download Results*: Download the results file of the run (if
   available).

- *Download Sources*: Download the complete set of source files
   associated to this run. 

- *Browse*: Browse the run directory.  Sci2Web_ is equipped with a
  simple albeit functional file manager.  It allows you to browse
  directories listing files and subdirectories with the right
  permissions allowing authors, contributors or web masters to
  maintain safe critical files.  In the case of the directory of a run
  the list of files includes only certain configuration and result
  files.  If you want to have access to other files use the Download
  Sources link if available.

Working with templates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A *configuration template* is a file containing the configuration of a
typical run of a given application.  When a new run is created the
Default template is used by default.  Users can create their own
templates and use them to generate other runs.

To create a new template use the configuration window of the run you
want to use as a model and go to the *run tab*.

.. image:: images/application-template-creation.jpg

There you will find and input box and two buttons, an |AddButton| and
a |SaveButton| that allow you to create a new template and save an
existing one respectively.  You have to give a name to the template.
Here you can use blank spaces though the use of special characters is
not recommended.  Once your new template is created and after
reloading the run history page you will find in the control panel the
option to create new runs from the recently created template.  You can
use also the control panel options to remove an existing template.  

But why should you use templates?  One of the most interesting
features of Sci2Web_ as a tool to control on-line scientific
applications is the possibility to create bunches of instances of an
application, change systematically certain input parameters and run
all them with a single click.  This kind of operations are frequently
called *parametric studies*.  To create a *parametric study* you can
use templates to generate the set of similar runs that conforms the
study.

Let us give you an example using the sample application **MercuPy**
and its version ``3B-1.0``.  This version of MercuPy allows you to
simulate the dynamic of a three body system where one of them is much
more massive than the other two.  That is the case of the
Sun-Earth-Moon system.  Imagine you want to investigate the effect
that the eccentricity of the Moon orbit respect to the Earth has in
its dynamical evolution.  You want to simulate a 10 years period for 5
different synthetic Sun-Earth-Moon systems with Moon geocentric
eccentricities of 0.0, 0.2, 0.4 and 0.8. 

The first step is to create a new run with the Default template.  Then
open the configure window for this run and set all the input
parameters for the simulation including an initial eccentricity.
Using the configuration window for this model run create a new
template with the name *Sun-Earth-Moon system*.  We can also to assign
a easy to identify name to this model run.  Something like *SEM: e=0*
could be appropiate.  Changing the name of the run will require that
you save the run before to continue.

Once the run has been saved and the new template has been created
close the configuration window and reload the run history page.  Open
the control panel and creates with the *Sun-Earth-Moon system*
template four new runs.

.. image:: images/template-example-SEM-runs-creation.jpg

Now you have to reconfigure each run assigning them the respective
eccentricity.  Give to each run a proper name following the same rule
as that used for the name of the model run.  Once all the runs in the
parametric study has been configured, select all in the history table,
compile and then submit them.

.. image:: images/template-example-SEM-history.jpg

If all the runs complete successfully now you have the results of your
parametric study.  You can retrieve those results using two methods:
1) downloading the results of each run one by one with the respective
option in the contextual menu and 2) using the database search tool.
In the following section we will explain in detail how to search for
results in the database of an application.

Searching for results 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Most of the scientific applications ported to Sci2Web_ have a database
containing the properties and results of each run succesfully
completed in the web interface. In general these results can be
retrieved by any visitor of the application page using a specially
designed interface.  You can access the database interface in the
*database* tab of the application page.

.. image:: images/application-database-interface.jpg

The results are retrieved using an sql *select* command.  In the
textarea input element you have write the criteria matching the runs
you want to recover.  You have to use the internal name of the input
variables that are listed clicking at the Database Specification link.
The following operators can be used in the query:

- Numeric comparison: ``=``, ``<>``, ``<``, ``>``, ``<=``, ``>=``.
  Example: ``Field1>=0``

- BETWEEN: Between an inclusive range.  Example: ``Field1 between 1 and 10``

- LIKE: Search for a pattern.  Use '%' as the wildcard.  Example:
  ``Field1 like '%Sun%'``

- IN: The exact value of the field is in a list of values.  Example:
  ``Field1 in ('Star','Planet','Moon')``

- AND, OR: logical operators. Example: ``Field1<1E2 AND Field2>0``

- (): Group operators.  Example: ``Field1 like '%0.2%' and (Field2>0
  or Field3<100)``

Following the example developed in the previous section you can
retrieve the results of the runs in the parametric study using the
query shown in the figure below.

.. image:: images/application-database-query.jpg

Once you have the table with the list of results matching your query
you can perform two basic actions on them: download a big tarball
containing a set of compressed files with the results of the runs in
separated directories.  Or join all the results in a single directory
and return the corresponding tarball.  

The second option is best suited if you want to compare results from
different runs using for example plots or statistical tools.  In this
case the file names for each run have an unique suffix identifying the
run.  Additionally a table matching the run suffix and its
characteristics are listed in a text file ``allruns.oxt`` included in
the join directory.

The plotting tool
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One of the most common task once a set of results are obtained after
running a scientific application is try to plot some of the data
obtained.  Sci2Web_ is equipped with a basic albeit complete tool to
generate plots from the data produced by a run.  This feature allows
you to create images from computed data without download the results.

The Sci2Web_ tool uses the Matplotlib python package.  Those
familiarized with Matplotlib will find common the syntax of the
commands and the options of the plotting tool.

To use the plotting tool browse the results directory of a finished
run and find the data file you want to plot.

.. image:: images/run-browse-results.jpg

Select the plot option in the contextual menu of the datafile and wait
until the plotting tool is openned in a new window.  It could takes
some time while the tool generates the a default image from the data
file.

.. image:: images/plotting-tool.jpg

The tool is rather intuitive.  In the left panel you have a form where
the basic information about the plot should be input.  There you have
to select the data file or data files you want to plot, the number of
the column(s) in the data file(s) with the values of the abscisas (X
Column), the number of the column(s) with the ordinates (Y Column),
the line style(s) and the range of the x- and y-axis (X Range and Y
Range).  In the right panel you will find other input boxes to set the
labels of the axes and the title of the plot.

There are different type of plots you could generate with this tool:

- Single file, single y-column.  This is the most simple type of
  column.  The plotting options are as shown in the previous figure.

- Single file, multiple columns.  If you want to plot multiple columns
  of the same file add the numbers of the other columns to the Y
  Columns input field always between brackets.  Example: ``[2,9]``.
  The linestyle for each column will be by default the same.  If you
  want to customize the line styles of each column add a new style
  parametrization for the new column in the Styles field.  Example:
  ``[('a','blue','-',1,' ',2),('q','red','-',1,' ',2)]``.

  .. image:: images/plotting-multiple-columns.jpg

- Multiple file, simple x- and y-column specification.  You can also
  include in the same plot, data coming from multiple files.  To do
  this add the name of the additional files into the Files field.  If
  you do not modify the X Column and Y Column fields the same X and Y
  columns specification will be used for both filesq.

- Multiple file, complex x- and y-column specification.  When
  including multiple files you can specify the x- and y-columns and
  their respective styles in very complex ways.  The Styles field used
  to generate the ploto shown below is:
  
     [(r'$a_{\oplus}$','blue','-',1,'+',2),(r'$q_{\oplus}$','blue','--',1,'+',2),(r'$Q_{\oplus}$','blue','-.',1,'+',2)],[(r'$a_{moon}$','red','-',1,'+',2),(r'$q_{moon}$','red','--',1,'+',2)]

  .. image:: images/plotting-multiple-columns-complex.jpg

  Notice the use of LaTeX to specify the labels (the ``r`` before any
  label or text tag in LaTeX format is mandatory).

Using the Extra code field you can add other elements to the plot. In
this case you need to know Matplotlib and python and realize that the
axes object for the plot is internally called ``ax``.  In the
following example a horizontal line with a text has been added to the
figure using the Extra code::

       '
       ax.axhline(0.95,color="black",linewidth=3);
       ax.text(30,0.955,"inner boundary",horizontalalignment="right");
       '

Notice that each line of the Extra code should be end in ';'.

.. image:: images/plotting-extra-code.jpg

More properties of the plot could be modified expanding the plot
properties form (|AddButton| button at the end of the form).

-----------------------

Copyright (C) 2011 Jorge I. Zuluaga
